🎙️ V.A.L. - Voice Activated Listener (CLI Assistant)
V.A.L. (Voice Activated Listener) is a basic command-line voice assistant built in Python. It listens for your commands via your microphone and performs simple, predefined tasks, such as providing conversational responses, checking the time, or searching the web.

✨ Features
This assistant is designed to handle common, straightforward commands:

Wake Word Detection: Begins listening for commands after hearing a specific "wake word" (e.g., "Hello Assistant").

Utility Functions: Can accurately state the current time and date.

Web Search: Capable of opening your default browser and searching Google for any user-specified query (e.g., "Search for Python programming tips").

Play Song: Also capable of opening youtube through the browser for any song just ask “alexa” to play <song name> .

⚙️ Dependencies
This project relies on several key Python packages for audio processing and execution:

Package

Purpose

SpeechRecognition

Handles converting spoken words to text (Speech-to-Text, STT).

pyttsx3

Provides local, offline Text-to-Speech (TTS) functionality.

pyaudio

Used by SpeechRecognition to access the microphone audio stream.

webbrowser

Handles opening the default web browser for search queries.



🚀 Installation and Setup
1. Clone the Repository
Start by cloning the project files to your local machine:

git clone [https://github.com/your-username/voice-assistant-val.git](https://github.com/your-username/voice-assistant-val.git)
cd voice-assistant-val

2. Create a Virtual Environment (Recommended)
Using a virtual environment prevents conflicts with your system's global Python packages.

python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate   # On Windows, use `venv\Scripts\activate`

3. Install Dependencies
Install all necessary libraries using pip:

pip install -r requirements.txt

(Note: Ensure you create a requirements.txt file containing the four dependencies listed above.)

⚠️ Troubleshooting pyaudio
If you encounter errors during installation related to pyaudio, you may need to install system dependencies like portaudio first.

Ubuntu/Debian: sudo apt-get install portaudio19-dev

macOS (using Homebrew): brew install portaudio

💡 Usage
1. Start the Assistant
Run the main Python script from your active virtual environment:

python assistant.py

2. Command Examples
Once running, the assistant will wait for its wake word.

Command Type

Example Spoken Phrase

Expected Action

Joke

“Tell me a joke”

A random joke will be shown

Time/Date

"What time is it?"

Assistant speaks the current time.

Web Search

"Search for a person— who the heck is ‘person name’ and tell me about’person’ "

only one line answer will occur.
